profile + blog post for Michael Oviedo (#3760)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-04-24-Redline-Testing-Comes-to-OpenSearch-Benchmark.md

---

# Redline testing now available in OpenSearch Benchmark

**Automatically determine your OpenSearch cluster's throughput limits—no guesswork required**

"How much traffic can my cluster really handle?" is a question many OpenSearch users face before moving to production. Until now, finding your cluster's **redline**—the point beyond which it can no longer maintain acceptable service levels—required trial and error, guesswork, or time-consuming manual tuning.

With redline testing in OpenSearch Benchmark, you can now dynamically scale client load based on real-time cluster performance to automatically identify your cluster's throughput ceiling.

## The challenge of guessing thresholds

OpenSearch Benchmark recently introduced support for ramping up clients and throughput during a benchmark run. However, users still needed to perform the following actions when benchmarking:

- Estimate what amount of load would break the cluster.
- Convert the estimate into the appropriate number of client threads and target throughput
- Manually watch for failures in the OSB logs or cluster dashboards.

> - Raise the estimate if failures did not materialize, lower it if a sufficient number of errors were encountered

Reviewer: Raise the estimate of what??

The more I look at this, the more I think the streamlined list with more detail will read better. The amount of detail on this list makes it read like a checklist instead of a series of actions. I would suggest deleting the new list and including some of the additional detail Govind suggested with the following:

```suggestion
OpenSearch Benchmark recently added support for ramping up clients and throughput during a benchmark run. However, users still had to complete several manual steps when benchmarking:

- Estimate the amount of load that could break the cluster, then convert that estimate into the appropriate number of client threads and target throughput.
- Monitor the Benchmark logs or cluster dashboard for failures and adjust the load estimate based on the number of errors—raising it if no failures occurred, or lowering it if a significant number were encountered.
- Rerun the benchmark with different parameters and loads until reaching the maximum sustainable threshold for the workload.
```

- Iterate until the breaking point and maximum steady state workload intensities are identified 

These time-consuming tasks made it difficult to pinpoint the maximum sustainable throughput.

## What we built: Redline testing

Redline testing automates the following:

> - A control module to monitor request throughput and failures in real time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A control module to monitor request throughput and failures in real time.
```

- A **self-adjusting load mechanism** to pause or unpause clients based on observed behavior  

This enables OpenSearch Benchmark to perform the following actions:

- Ramp up active clients  
- Detect when failures begin  
- Scale back automatically, wait for recovery, and resume testing  

The result: OpenSearch Benchmark can now determine your cluster's redline point in a single test run.

## How it works

The following diagram provides a high-level overview of the actor-based execution flow in OpenSearch Benchmark. It illustrates how benchmark tasks are allocated and executed across multiple worker actors, each of which manages a group of clients responsible for sending requests to a target OpenSearch cluster, using the following components:

![Flowchart for OpenSearch Benchmark's actor system](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-04-24-Redline-Testing-Comes-to-OpenSearch-Benchmark/OpenSearch Benchmark-system-architecture.jpg){: .img-fluid}

OpenSearch Benchmark uses the **Actor Model**, which structures concurrent, distributed systems around isolated, message-passing components.

> Normally, OpenSearch Benchmark starts with a fixed number of 'clients' that all send requests at the same rate throughout a test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normally, OpenSearch Benchmark starts with a fixed number of clients, each sending requests at a constant rate for the duration of the test.
```

> With this feature, the tool can automatically ramp that number up or down as the test runs. It can add more clients when it needs to push harder, or pull clients back when it needs to ease off.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new ramp-up feature, the tool can automatically adjust the number of clients during the test—adding more to increase load or reducing them to ease off.
```

> This lets you see how your OpenSearch cluster behaves under changing pressure, rather than at just one fixed load, and provides a more realistic, flexible benchmark that can mimic real-world traffic patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows you to observe how your OpenSearch cluster responds to changing load pressure, rather than a single fixed level, resulting in a more realistic and flexible benchmark that reflects real-world traffic patterns.
```

### Timed mode and redline logic

OpenSearch Benchmark supports the following two modes for redline testing:

- **Iteration mode**: Runs tasks for a fixed number of iterations  
- **Timed mode**: Runs tasks for a fixed duration  

Redline testing operates only in the timed mode. It performs the following actions:

1. Ramp up client load until errors occur.
2. Scale down in response to failures.
3. Wait for recovery and ramp up again.

### How the Feedback Component Manages Clients

A special “feedback” actor watches for errors as the test runs. It keeps a simple list of every worker and their clients, marking each one as either “running” or “paused.”

When everything is healthy, clients stay “running” and keep sending requests.

> If failures start piling up, the feedback component can “pause” individual clients to give the system a breather.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If failures begin to accumulate, the feedback actor can pause individual clients to reduce pressure on the system.
```

> Once things stabilize, those paused clients are switched back to “running.”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once stability is restored, the paused clients return to the **running** state.
```

> This lets the benchmark automatically throttle back parts of the load when problems occur—and ramp them up again when things recover—so you get a more realistic picture of how your cluster handles hiccups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach allows the benchmark to automatically throttle parts of the load when issues arise and ramp them back up when conditions improve—providing a more realistic view of how your cluster handles intermittent problems.
```

For more technical details, see the [RFC on redline testing](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark/issues/785#issue-2898221524).

> ## How to run a workload in redline testing mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run a workload in redline testing mode
```

Getting started with redline testing begins with creating a timed test procedure that defines the duration, target throughput, and number of clients. Once configured, you can run the benchmark with a single command—and optionally customize the maximum number of clients to match your cluster's capacity.

Create a timed test procedure using settings similar to the following:

```json
{
  "name": "timed-mode-test-procedure",
  "schedule": [
    {
      "operation": "keyword-terms",
      "warmup-time-period": {{ warmup_time | default(300) | tojson }},
      "time-period": {{ time_period | default(900) | tojson }},
      "target-throughput": {{ target_throughput | default(20) | tojson }},
      "clients": {{ search_clients | default(20) }}
    }
  ]
}
```

You can modify the default parameter values as you see appropriate. 

> Documentation about the parameters is available at our [documentation website](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/benchmark/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

```bash
opensearch-benchmark execute-test \
  --pipeline=benchmark-only \
  --target-hosts=<your-opensearch-cluster> \
  --workload=<workload> \
  --test-procedure=<your-timed-mode-test-procedure> \
  --redline-test
```

Users can customize redline test parameters—such as the maximum number of clients, the client ramp-up rate, the percentage of clients to pause during back-off, and the wait time before resuming scale-up—using the following flags:

`--redline-scale-step`: Specifies the number of clients to unpause in each scaling iteration (integer value).
`--redline-scaledown-percentage`: Specifies the percentage of clients to pause when an error occurs (float value).
- `--redline-post-scaledown-sleep`: Specifies the number of seconds the feedback actor waits before initiating a scale-up after scaling down (integer value).
- `--redline-max-clients`: Specifies the maximum number of clients allowed during redline testing. If unset, OpenSearch Benchmark defaults to the number of clients defined in the test procedure (integer value).

OpenSearch Benchmark captures the following log information:
- During the test:
  - The current number of clients

>   - The pause/unpause events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The pause/unpause events.
```

>   - The reasons for scaling back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The reasons for scaling back.
```

- After the test:
  - The maximum number of clients reached
  - A summary of test result metrics like service time, throughput, latency, and more.

The following chart shows how redline testing in OpenSearch Benchmark incrementally increases client load during a timed test. Each step represents a controlled ramp-up, allowing the system to observe when performance begins to degrade. In this example image, throughput steadily rises until it plateaus—indicating that the cluster's redline has been reached. This automated feedback loop removes guesswork and enables precise load testing in a single run.

![Latency over time](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-04-24-Redline-Testing-Comes-to-OpenSearch-Benchmark/dashboards-latency-over-time.png){: .img-fluid}

## What's next?

Upcoming improvements to redline testing may include:

- Smarter ramp-up strategies, such as binary or exponential search.  
- Scaling based on latency or service time, not just request failures.  

> Redline testing is available now in OpenSearch Benchmark. We hope you find it useful and look forward to your feedback in the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/) or at the OpenSearch Benchmark [community meetup](https://www.meetup.com/opensearch/events/307446531/?eventOrigin=group_upcoming_events)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redline testing is now available in OpenSearch Benchmark. We hope you find this feature useful and welcome your feedback in the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/) or at the upcoming OpenSearch Benchmark [community meetup](https://www.meetup.com/opensearch/events/307446531/?eventOrigin=group_upcoming_events)!

```

Create a timed test procedure using settings similar to the following:

```json
{
  "name": "timed-mode-test-procedure",
  "schedule": [
    {
      "operation": "keyword-terms",
      "warmup-time-period": {{ warmup_time | default(300) | tojson }},
      "time-period": {{ time_period | default(900) | tojson }},
      "target-throughput": {{ target_throughput | default(20) | tojson }},
      "clients": {{ search_clients | default(20) }}
    }
  ]
}
```

You can modify the [default parameter](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/benchmark/reference/workloads/test-procedures/) values to match your workload.

Once you have a test procedure ready, you can run the benchmark test with the following command:

```bash
opensearch-benchmark execute-test \
  --pipeline=benchmark-only \
  --target-hosts=<your-opensearch-cluster> \
  --workload=<workload> \
  --test-procedure=<your-timed-mode-test-procedure> \
  --redline-test
```

> Users can customize redline test parameters—such as the maximum number of clients, the client ramp-up rate, the percentage of clients to pause during back-off, and the wait time before resuming scale-up—using the following flags:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users can customize redline test parameters—such as the maximum number of clients, the client ramp-up rate, the percentage of clients to pause during backoff, and the amount of time to wait before resuming scale-up—using the following flags:
```

`--redline-scale-step`: Specifies the number of clients to unpause in each scaling iteration (integer value).
`--redline-scaledown-percentage`: Specifies the percentage of clients to pause when an error occurs (float value).
- `--redline-post-scaledown-sleep`: Specifies the number of seconds the feedback actor waits before initiating a scale-up after scaling down (integer value).
- `--redline-max-clients`: Specifies the maximum number of clients allowed during redline testing. If unset, OpenSearch Benchmark defaults to the number of clients defined in the test procedure (integer value).

OpenSearch Benchmark captures the following log information:
- During the test:

>   - The current number of clients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The current number of clients
```

>   - The pause/unpause events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The pause/unpause events
```

>   - The reasons for scaling back.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The reasons for scaling back
```

- After the test:

>   - The maximum number of clients reached.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The maximum number of clients reached
```

>   - A summary of test result metrics such as service time, throughput, and latency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - A summary of test result metrics, such as service time, throughput, and latency
```

> The following chart shows how redline testing in OpenSearch Benchmark incrementally increases client load during a timed test. Each step represents a controlled ramp-up, allowing the system to observe when performance begins to degrade. In this example image, throughput steadily rises until it plateaus—indicating that the cluster's redline has been reached. This automated feedback loop removes guesswork and enables precise load testing in a single run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following chart shows how redline testing in OpenSearch Benchmark incrementally increases client load during a timed test. Each step represents a controlled ramp-up, allowing the system to observe when performance begins to degrade. In the following example image, throughput steadily rises until it plateaus—indicating that the cluster's redline has been reached. This automated feedback loop removes guesswork and enables precise load testing in a single run.
```

![Latency over time](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-04-24-Redline-Testing-Comes-to-OpenSearch-Benchmark/dashboards-latency-over-time.png){: .img-fluid}

## What's next?

Upcoming improvements to redline testing may include:

- Smarter ramp-up strategies, such as binary or exponential search.  
- Scaling based on latency or service time, not just request failures.  

> Redline testing is now available in OpenSearch Benchmark. We hope you find this feature useful and welcome your feedback in the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/) or at the upcoming OpenSearch Benchmark [community meetup](https://www.meetup.com/opensearch/events/307446531/?eventOrigin=group_upcoming_events)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Redline testing is now available in OpenSearch Benchmark. We hope you find this feature useful and welcome your feedback on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/) or at the upcoming OpenSearch Benchmark [community meetup](https://www.meetup.com/opensearch/events/307446531/?eventOrigin=group_upcoming_events)!
```

---
layout: post
title: Redline testing now available in OpenSearch Benchmark
authors:
   - moviedo
   - rishabhsi

> date: 2025-04-24 12:30:00 -0600

Reviewer 3: Blog publish date: 2025-06-23

> date: 2025-04-24 12:30:00 -0600

Reviewer 3: Update publish date to: 2025-06-23

Author: all set 👍

categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: OpenSearch Benchmark, OpenSearch Benchmark, workloads, redline testing
meta_description: Learn how the new redline testing feature in OpenSearch Benchmark helps you automatically determine the maximum throughput your cluster can handle—no guesswork required.

> ---

Author: @pajuric done!

- **BenchmarkActor**: Initiates the benchmarking process.  
- **WorkerCoordinatorActor**: Manages worker lifecycle and task distribution using an allocation matrix from the **Allocator**.  
- **Workers (Worker1 through WorkerN)**: Executes tasks by managing clients via the **AsyncIoAdapter**.  
- **Clients (Client1 through ClientN)**: Uses the `AsyncExecutor` class to perform operations against the target host in parallel.  

![Flowchart for OpenSearch Benchmark's actor system](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-04-24-Redline-Testing-Comes-to-OpenSearch-Benchmark/OpenSearch Benchmark-system-architecture.jpg){: .img-fluid}

OpenSearch Benchmark uses the **Actor Model**, which structures concurrent, distributed systems around isolated, message-passing components.

Each actor performs the following actions:

- Maintains private, isolated state  
- Processes messages sequentially  
- Can create other actors  
- Communicates asynchronously  

> By default, OpenSearch Benchmark spawns `n` worker actors (one per CPU core), distributing clients evenly across them. For example, with 10 workers and 20 clients, each manages 2 clients.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure this level of technical detail would be appropriate in a blog post that caters to the community at large, who may not be familiar or interested in internals.  Summarizing the gist by indicating that normally client count is static, but this feature permits the count to be increased or decreased dynamically would make this more readable.

 

### Timed mode and redline logic

OpenSearch Benchmark supports the following two modes for redline testing:

- **Iteration mode**: Runs tasks for a fixed number of iterations  
- **Timed mode**: Runs tasks for a fixed duration  

> Redline testing uses timed mode to perform the following actions:

Reviewer 4: Redline testing operates only in the timed mode.  It performs the following actions:

1. Ramp up client load until errors occur.
2. Scale down in response to failures.
3. Wait for recovery and ramp up again.

### Feedback Actor and shared state

Failures are sent to the **Feedback Actor** via a shared queue. A shared dictionary manages the client state:

```json
{
  "worker-1": { "client-0": true, "client-1": false }
}
```

The following settings reflect these client states: 

- `true` = active  
- `false` = paused  

> 

Reviewer 4: Again, would skip this part.

Author: Let me know what you think of the rewrite I made!

This state is shared using Python's `multiprocessing` module. Each client checks the dictionary before sending a request—paused clients skip execution.

For more technical details, see the [RFC on redline testing](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark/issues/785#issue-2898221524).

> ## Getting started with redline testing

Reviewer 4: How to run a workload in redline testing mode

> Getting started with redline testing begins with a timed test procedure that defines the duration, target throughput, and number of clients. Once configured, you can run the benchmark with a single command—and optionally customize the maximum number of clients to match your cluster's capacity.

Reviewer 4: begins with creating a timed test..

  "schedule": [
    {
      "operation": "keyword-terms",
      "warmup-time-period": {{ warmup_time | default(300) | tojson }},
      "time-period": {{ time_period | default(900) | tojson }},
      "target-throughput": {{ target_throughput | default(20) | tojson }},
      "clients": {{ search_clients | default(20) }}
    }
  ]
}
```

Then run the benchmark test with the following command:

```bash
opensearch-benchmark execute-test \
  --pipeline=benchmark-only \
  --target-hosts=<your-opensearch-cluster> \
  --workload=<workload> \
  --test-procedure=<your-timed-mode-test-procedure> \
  --redline-test
```

To override the default max clients (1000), add a number to the `--redline-test` flag, as shown in the following example:

```bash
--redline-test=1500
```

Users can customize redline test parameters such as the maximum number of clients, the client ramp-up rate, the percentage of clients to pause during back-off, and the wait time before resuming scale-up.

OpenSearch Benchmark captures the following log information:
- During the test:
  - The current number of clients.
  - The pause/unpause events
  - The reasons for scaling back
- After the test:

>   - The maximim number of clients reached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The maximum number of clients reached
```

>   - Any performance metrics

Reviewer 4: What type of perf metrics?  Should elaborate here.

The following chart shows how redline testing in OpenSearch Benchmark incrementally increases client load during a timed test. Each step represents a controlled ramp-up, allowing the system to observe when performance begins to degrade. In this example image, throughput steadily rises until it plateaus—indicating that the cluster's redline has been reached. This automated feedback loop removes guesswork and enables precise load testing in a single run.

![Latency over time](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-04-24-Redline-Testing-Comes-to-OpenSearch-Benchmark/dashboards-latency-over-time.png){: .img-fluid}

## What's next?

Upcoming improvements to redline testing may include:

- Smarter ramp-up strategies, such as binary or exponential search.  
- Scaling based on latency or service time, not just request failures.  

> Redline testing is available now in OpenSearch Benchmark. Try it out and share your feedback by creating a [GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Benchmark/issues)!

Reviewer 4: Redline testing is now available in OpenSearch Benchmark.  We hope you find it useful and look forward to your feedback in the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/) or at the OpenSearch Benchmark [community meetup](https://www.meetup.com/opensearch/events/307446531/?eventOrigin=group_upcoming_events).
